Well, welcome to the Get Fit with Jodell podcast. I am as usual Jodell and as usual, or at least
once every month or so, I like to have Dr. Ray Pete on and so he's joining me today here
again to answer your questions. If you're not familiar with Dr. Pete, well, then you're
missing out. Why don't you check out raypeet.com. That's his website and you can, you can check
out who this amazing person is and his wealth of expertise and his immense articles and
publications that have been put out. I highly recommend this individual. So without further
ado, Dr. Pete, thank you so much for joining me. How are you?
Okay. Very good.
Awesome. Well, I've, I reached out to our listeners. I got a slew of questions here
again today, so we're just going to jump right into those. Um, first things first, as far
as like you feel about what's going on right now in the world, what are your thoughts on
like the, the new variants of the COVID strain that are coming out? Can I ask your just recent
opinion on things?
I haven't seen any evidence of the new properties that they are ascribing to the new variant.
There's one website I've been looking at occasionally that is posting the actual RNA code of all
of the base pairs that make up the code. And the first time I looked, there were 3,400
variants. A few days ago, someone reported that that website now lists 6,000 variants.
But for some reason I've picked out one or two of those strains and claimed that they
are highly infectious, but I haven't seen any, any information supporting that. And that
is nothing new. There are several lawyers showing state and national health information
for refusing to reveal the scientific evidence that would support their mandated lockdown
and mask wearing and vaccination and all of that. The government is just acting while
keeping secret anything they really know. And so everything they're saying could just
be pure fantasy. And for people to respond to that and obey the instructions on the basis
of secret evidence, it's an extension of something governments have been getting away with for
decades. They say the information the government has is too sensitive for the people to know.
And so you have to trust the government. And a friend of mine in Germany said she afraid
that the people in Germany are now reacting just as obediently and foolishly as they did
during the 1930s, accepting his words without any criticism. She says she sees exactly that
kind of blind obedience in the population of the present.
Yeah, it's such a weird world we live in for sure. And your thoughts on like the vaccine,
you know, I haven't seen a lot of research. And so what are your thoughts on this vaccine
and how people are changing it?
The first thing is that an entirely new principle that doesn't meet any of the standard definitions
of vaccination, the whole history to really understand that you have to go back at least
120 years to get a picture of what was meant by vaccination and how the immune system was
understood to react to disease. And the basic doctrine of the immune system as primarily
an antibody response, this was produced in reaction to Paul Ehrlich's sales of an arsenic
compound to treat syphilis. And his claims sort of hit a magic button in the consuming
population. He called the substance a magic bullet. But there never was any magic bullet
defect involved in Paul Ehrlich's treatments. But what caught on was the idea that our immune
system works like a bunch of magic bullets, which are called antibodies. That's the extent
of the investigation of what the immune system is. Sharing the Nobel Prize in 1908 with Paul
Ehrlich was Elliot Metzenkopf, who had been the critic of Ehrlich's simplified reduced
concept of immunity. Metzenkopf was an embryologist who saw multilayer defensive processes working
in the organism starting with phagocytosis. And that actual scientific investigation of
what's going on when an organism reacts to the environment, that has been horribly neglected
in science. And what bounces along, Nobel Prize after Nobel Prize, is this silly doctrine
that our immune system is primarily based on antibodies. And that just isn't a scientific
idea. So, first of all, the metaphysics or philosophy behind the stuff that Fauci and
others are talking about, it's all a metaphysical system that has built up in these 110 years.
So, the criticism has to start with looking at what immunity really is. And then the idea
that came up just a few years ago was not to use a whole killed or weakened pathogen
to arouse immunity, but to reduce it for some reason to the extremely simplified nucleic
acid, the messenger RNA. And it happens that they chose the messenger RNA that produces
the pathogenic effect. You don't need the pathogenic effect to have specificity for
a certain type of virus. But for some reason they've settled on that, probably because
they got the code for the RNA and they can manufacture that synthetically just from the
code number without ever having a natural virus to experiment with. So, it can go right
from picking a number off the internet in the laboratory to manufacture a substance
that will make the pathogenic component of the virus. It happens to be the component
that inactivates our anti-inflammatory enzyme system because the virus sticks to that and
inactivates it, kills our defensive anti-inflammatory process, leaving the remaining part the inflammatory
system without control. So, if we produce this particular protein, the spike protein, and
if that takes over and regularly comes out of our cells that have assimilated the so-called
vaccine RNA, our bodies will then be producing a pro-inflammatory material. And labs in Boston,
White's Head lab and one of the Harvard labs, people there have tested in vitro and demonstrated
that our natural enzymes are able to incorporate the RNA of the vaccine into our own genome,
into the human genome, which means that on the basis of this in vitro study, we have
the capacity to pass on that genetic information to offspring forever.
Well, you mentioned the immune system and my concern is that we're going to see a
repercussion across the globe of that broken immune system is based on all of the lack
of bacteria. We're sterilizing everything. Everyone is using hand sanitizer everywhere.
No one touches anyone anymore. And we need bacteria like our entire body has different
microbiomes in the eye, in the gut, in the breast tissue. And so, what are your thoughts
on just this dampening of the immune system and the over-sterilization?
I think the active promotion of inflammation is a great first danger. And I suspect that
the drug companies are now worried about that because it's a lab-synthesized material that
makes it easy to produce in vast amounts. So they promised that millions of doses would
be available almost immediately. But December 22nd, in the county of New York that hadn't
had a pace in the whole county of COVID for that month, they vaccinated in one nursing
home system. They vaccinated 198 people. And of those vaccinated within, I think it was
about a week, 24 people had died, an astounding percentage of them vaccinated. And the explanation
of the nursing home was that at the end of the vaccine people was that suddenly there
had been a resurgence of the COVID virus and that by chance killed the people who had been
vaccinated. And I think with an experience like that, a vast increase in mortality followed
by around the world, people collapsing with anaphylactic shock, I think the drug companies
all suddenly realized that until the government gives them special immunity beyond even what
they have been given for ordinary vaccine damage, until they get that new special immunity,
I think they are going to find it hard to deliver the promised number of vaccines. I think the
awareness immediately was there in the industry making it because of the possibility of great
liability killing tens of millions of people.
And what about mental health? I mean, are you concerned about the mental health of people
having to deal with all of this lockdown and isolation and then not touching, not hugging?
Yeah, that was projected years in advance that social dislocation, unemployment in particular,
but any kind of interference with normal social interactions will increase drug addiction,
depression, suicide, violence, violent crimes. Everything goes wrong when you damage someone's
likelihood and thousands and thousands of people are losing their businesses as well as their
opportunity to work. And so it was absolutely foreseeable that you would have much greater
damage from the lockdown and the stupid mandated behavior than any influenza season ever produced.
And in accepting the current numbers of deaths given out by the CDC, you have to take into
account the fact that there is a most glaring history of misrepresentation of flu season
mortality. Some years have declared that influenza was killing as high as 50, even 80,000 people
during the flu season and in a good year it might be 30,000. Then on the basis of actual
testing for influenza virus, they found that the influenza virus was present maybe only
in two or three thousand of those 50 or 60,000 deaths from pneumonia, something 95% or more
of the deaths from pneumonia in the hospitals during the winter season or had an unknown
cause, definitely not influenza. And it came out that they were knowingly calling those
tens of thousands of winter deaths pneumonia influenza deaths just to scare people to get
their influenza vaccine absolute lying to the public to manipulate them into getting
the influenza vaccine with its very ambiguous history. And so now when we look at their
figures for total mortality, there have only been a few people starting last winter who
were keeping track of the normal annual pneumonia mortality and of any changes that were occurring
in 2019 or in 2020 over preceding years. And right from the start, anyone who was looking
at their numbers could see that something very unbiological was happening. And one person
later in 2020 summed up those observations and the numbers that were continuing to be
put out by the CDC. Genevieve Breond, a professor at Johns Hopkins University, has an article
on the internet on the mortality from, based entirely on CDC's figures. And what she found
was no real increase in mortality, despite that huge surge in April, supposedly from
COVID, that followed the instructions to diagnose COVID whenever a positive test for the presence
of the virus, which is not a good way to diagnose a disease. But anyway, they instructed people
to diagnose many things as COVID that previously wouldn't have been diagnosed, and the money
distribution to compensate for the shutdown, that included $14,000 per patient diagnosed
with COVID. And then if they were put on force oxygen inhalation, another $44,000, according
to the Kaiser Family Foundation website. So they were paying hospitals to diagnose and
treat COVID patients. But anyway, at the same early part of April, when the so-called death
from COVID increased so astronomically, there was an equal opposite decline in influenza.
And since then, people around the world have commented on the historical unique event of
the disappearance of influenza everywhere in the world. And in Genevieve Breon's article,
she also notes that the numbers that make up for the supposed increase in COVID, there
was also a great decrease in deaths from heart attacks and several other normal diseases.
So anyone just looking at CDC's own figures in detail should make their own conclusion
that nothing has happened.
You know, as far as like the mental health, that's what I've seen the most too, I think
on the call before we started recording, I had told you about an EMT that I know that
I'd asked him how much, you know, COVID have you seen in our area? And he said, Oh, not
very much. I keep seeing mental health issues. That's the biggest issue. And so, you know,
for me being a practitioner, I really want to offer people that have to isolate or have
to quarantine or, you know, or just are just staying at home. But go out in nature. If
there's nothing else, if you can't be with the ones you love, there's something really
healing and comforting about nature, about forest bathing and being in the woods. Dr.
Pete, what would you offer people that are, you know, they live alone and they're not
in a position where they can go out and about very much? What would you say to them? Just
stay healthy. Immediately after the great lockdown for the new Wuhan virus in China,
just a couple of weeks after they declared that they had contained the infection, I think
it was towards the end of 2019, there were pictures on the internet of people in public
swimming pools in Wuhan crowded together at two or three feet apart playing in this giant
swimming pool, hundreds of people having fun. China had the best experience, best knowledge
of it, but they considered it absolutely harmless once the confinement had done its job and
went back to normal behavior. Having fun, getting together, socializing, working, doing everything
normally. I think that's the only real solution is to realize that the government has seriously
misbehaved. Yeah, so on that, we will jump into the questioner, Brandon, Trine's question.
He said, "I'd be curious about Dr. Pete's thoughts surrounding bile acid salt and its
use mixed with glycine to potentiate significant motility in cases where migrating motor complex
and peristalsis were deficient. This is really strong stuff and not something I would recommend
to just anybody." He said, "As well as what are his thoughts on the top suggestions for
someone with spinal pain?" Yeah, bile has been used very traditionally as an aid to
digestion, and they can be dangerous, but I think with moderate use with a meal, for
some people, they can improve digestion. And your top suggestions for someone with spinal
pain? Oh, the back is full of cartil intramus joints, and so it's one of the, because it's
constantly flexing and under pressure, it's one of the first places that cartilage metabolism
problem shows up. But I don't think there's anything in most situations unique to the
spinal pain over other joints. There are specific sensitivities, like the backbone is a focus
of joint pain, mostly in women, and the spondylitis, and close segments spondylitis, I think fits
in more often, and the inflammation in that case can be traced to deranged bacteria balances
in the intestine so fastly, typically alleviated. But the general problem of cartilage inflammation
and distortion and pain, for example, prolonged back problems during growth can lead to scoliosis
or crooked growth of the back, but that same process shows up sometimes in knock knees
or arms that turn out of the elbow, knees that turn in so the thighs are together when the
feet are spread, and the main cause of weak and swollen cartilage leading to those use
aggravated pain and distortion, the main cause of that is thyroid deficiency. The classic
thyroid textbooks showed typical joint deformations because the low thyroid function leads to
swelling of the cartilage.
That makes sense. So he may want to get his thyroid checked out and see if maybe some
natural desiccated thyroid would work for the spine.
I've seen several people who were completely incapacitated by disc problems included, all
kinds of joint problems. When they hit the back, they compress on nerves and cause real
total disability. But I've seen people very thoroughly knocked out by those swollen back
joints in just a few weeks essentially supplementing thyroid and correcting nutritional
deficiencies and go from bedridden to perfectly healthy.
Okay. The next few questions we have, apparently hormone issues are running rampant and we've
got a lot of hormone questions, especially about bioidentical hormones. So Veronica Aiella
asks, "What does Ray Peat think about bioidentical hormones for women like the testosterone
pellet or creams? Also, if you're deficient in estrogen, what does he think is a good
idea to replace that hormone with as well?"
First, how do you test the deficiency of estrogen? There have only been a few studies
of this, but for example, starting with rat studies, there have been hundreds of thousands
of studies of hormone effects in rats. But I only know of two publications in which they
remove the ovaries. Classically, they say that creates a menopause like estrogen deficiency.
But in these studies who actually measured the rat's serum estrogen a week after removing
the ovaries, although there was an extreme progesterone deficiency, their estrogen level
was right back to normal. Absolutely no ovaries, but perfectly normal estrogen, but lacking
the balance of progesterone because that largely comes from the ovaries. If you measure a person
under different conditions in the presence of progesterone, there's one group that has
looked at all of the enzymes activated or inactivated by progesterone, and there are
about 10 or 11 such enzymes that are controlled in an on and off light by progesterone, which
have to do with the activation or inactivation of estrogen. When estrogen is inactivated
by attaching sulfuric acid or an acidic sugar to the estrogen molecule, it becomes water
soluble and is no longer soluble in cell substance, and so it enters the bloodstream from which
it exists via the kidneys. It happens that progesterone activates the enzymes that inactivate
estrogen, causing it to be lost from cells, no longer active inside cells. In the progesterone
deficiency, you have a reverse enzyme pattern, leaving estrogen in its active, oil-soluble
form where it stays inside cells and can't get out because it can't be water-solubleized.
So, in the progesterone deficiency, tested in humans as well as animals, the serum estrogen
seems to be practically zero, but the intracellular estrogen, it even can be newly synthesized,
not to see a formulae circulating estrogen being activated on kept-in cells, but cells
in this progesterone deficient state actually begin producing their own new estrogen inside
the breast, for example, or inside the uterus. So, it doesn't matter that you don't have
any estrogen circulating from the ovaries. In the absence of progesterone, there will
be no estrogen to speak of in the bloodstream, while the relevant breast, brain, kidney,
and uterine tissues are beginning to make their own estrogen. And so, with aging, when
they talk about the shutdown of the ovaries at menopause, they talk about whether it's
an estrogen deficient state, but it's exactly the things I was talking about. The first
thing that disappears when you stop having periods at age 45 or 50 or whatever, the estrogen
is no longer available to pass into the bloodstream on the way to leading the body and the kidneys.
So, immediately, with the disappearance of progesterone, you begin to experience unopposed
estrogen, and any increasing accumulated stress is going to exacerbate that or make the symptoms
worse and worse, keeping serum estrogen low while increasing the amount of the relevant
tissues. The whole idea of where estrogen comes from is absolutely contrary to the science.
Someone who is measuring the amount of estrogen produced by the healthy ovaries in healthy
menopause wanted to compare the blood coming out of the ovarian vein to other blood in
the body, so they took an arm vein and analyzed the amount of estrogen in the blood from the
arm and from the ovary, and the arm vein contained just as much estrogen as the ovary, and so
when you add up blades and arms and other tissues, you can't help but conclude that the ovaries
are an insignificant or relatively small source of body estrogen. So, scientifically, there
is absolutely no reason to think that an estrogen deficiency can ever exist.
What about your feelings on the bioidentical creams for testosterone? A lot of people I
know are doing bioidentical testosterone. What are your thoughts on that?
When you're under stress, such as menopause, stress caused by unbalanced estrogen and leading
to low thyroid function and very low progesterone, during stress, even small amounts of testosterone
will be converted to more estrogen. So, it's going to be very dangerous unless you correct
your progesterone and thyroid function to add testosterone equally with added progesterone.
Yeah, it's really about addressing the thyroid first, correct, and then, if needed, addressing
the hormones, yeah? Yeah, because when you correct the thyroid, you're lowering the stress
hormones, lowering estrogen by accelerating the liver's detoxifying of it, and promoting
very directly activating the production of progesterone from cholesterol. When your thyroid
is low, your cholesterol is invariably high, except in a few specific disease states, but
there's a mirror image relationship between thyroid function and cholesterol level. And
the reason cholesterol goes up when your thyroid goes down is that it's no longer being converted
into progesterone. Thyroid is massively activating the conversion of cholesterol into progesterone
and pregnant alone, primarily, as basic protective hormones.
Okay. So, Stephen Mitchell asks, you know, he's talking about bioidentical, too, does
Ray Peat believe that suppression caused from the use of bioidentical hormones, such as
testosterone, is mostly an issue with the lack of pregnant alone, which you kind of
already answered that. For example, if pregnant alone is supplied exogenously, suppression
of the pituitary hormones, such as LH, can that be a good thing, or would this idea be
completely wrong? As far as I know, there's no strong influence of pregnant alone on LH,
but too much testosterone can, the normal function of high testosterone is to turn off
luteinizing hormone, and with that decrease, progesterone decreases. So, just taking too
much natural, good testosterone tends to turn off your progesterone, and since progesterone
is a major anti-arromatase, an aromatase inhibitor, if you lower progesterone, you're going
to release aromatase action to convert testosterone to estrogen. So, taking testosterone by itself
is a risk in multiple ways of increasing your estrogen balance.
So, if somebody was taking testosterone, even like you said, a good kind, you would want
them to also be taking, obviously, if they're working on their thyroid, they're taking
a thyroid supplement, but also progesterone, or how would you say to help that individual
not convert the testosterone to estrogen? Progesterone and thyroid both tend to inhibit
a healthy man in his teens and twenties that might produce four or five milligrams per
day of testosterone, and ten or fifteen milligrams of DHEA. Medical treatments very often are
providing plenty milligrams a day, for example, instead of normal four or five. So, that's
almost certain to suppress progesterone while increasing estrogen.
TMC asks prolactinoma, "Is it possible to reverse those without surgery? What could
cause them in the first place?"
Just recently, someone was a mysterious, extremely high prolactin level, just by changing other
things in this diet, caused something like a hundred point decrease down to absolutely
normal prolactin. But those are strongly influenced by thyroid and by vitamin D and calcium in
the diet. The parathyroid hormone that there are surgeons who have created their own series
of vitamin D metabolism and calcium metabolism, they're the worst people to listen to, to
understand vitamin D. They're making, for example, just for a fifteen minute surgery,
they're making something like fifteen thousand dollars, about a thousand dollars a minute,
which justifies their inventing a new series of what vitamin D is. But they essentially
are saying that the prolactinoma has nothing to do with your diet or the parathyroid tumor.
Both of them are absolutely dependent on the diet. You can turn off your parathyroid hormone
with a proper amount of calcium in your diet, vitamin D, and supporting factors such as
thyroid hormone. Both of those tumors are a response to a defect in the calcium handling
system and the thyroid and vitamin D are usually responsible.
Okay, so get out in the sunshine, TMC, and get that vitamin D too. Butch843 asks, "I
want to know the use of nicotine gum for cognitive enhancement and alertness. Does repeat recommend
the use of nicotine gum?" It's a very interesting idea. I've been following it for years and
people have found that in middle age animals and older, if they don't start using nicotine
at a young age, there doesn't seem to be an addiction problem. But there can be directly
toxic effects from nicotine and that still hasn't been. We're right in the middle of
understanding what the nicotinic receptor system so-called is really doing. So I think
it's dangerous, but that does have a definite cognitive promoting effect. But I think it's
safer to do it with other things such as thyroid and caffeine.
I agree, yeah, for sure. Okay, this is an interesting question from Ms. Foster. "The best way to
treat an adrenal body type and lower cortisol because my sleep is very poor quality due
to a hiatal hernia. I wake up tired and have muscle wastage. I've tried everything I can
think of to sleep, such as getting outside during the day, dimming the lights at night,
mindfulness, yoga, taking Valerian, seeing a chiropractor, nothing works. I have symptoms
of low thyroid." So she's wondering what you would recommend Dr. Pete as far as this
lowering cortisol. It sounds to me like she definitely needs some thyroid, but also maybe
gesturone. What would you say? Yeah, I was a problem sleeper from puberty until I think
I was about 46 when I finally tried supplementing thyroid. The tiniest little click in the wall
would instantly wake me up during those years. Traveling around a lot, doing talks, I would
get very tired and have trouble going to sleep. After I started realizing that for other reasons
I needed a thyroid supplement, once I tried a 10 microgram tablet of T3 at bedtime when
I was in that fatigued traveling state. Instantly I went to sleep and slept soundly. Shortly
after that I was visiting a doctor who was going to introduce talks the next night. He
was haggard looking and said he hadn't slept for about four nights. Nothing worked to help
him get to sleep. I had a bottle of Cytomil in my pocket and gave him some. The next night
I got to the talk late and he was already starting the introduction. When I got up to
the microphone he pulled me aside and said that stuff is better than opium. There is
the power in getting that thyroid regulated in order to improve sleep for sure because
I also was one that suffered sleep for many years. Thyroid was the major thing that helped
me get it under control.
Hyhistamine is one of the classical wakefulness activators. That's why antihistamines put
you to sleep because the stress of hypothyroidism increases estrogen and so on which increases
your mast cell and other release of histamine. The thyroid increases your energy over the
estrogen and histamine and lets you sleep normally.
Young mad dog asks, "Is it possible to get rid of gynomastia after fixing estrogen, prolactin,
serotonin, cortisol?" It's been almost two years avoiding PUFA and I'm just wondering
what to do about the gynomastia.
Thyroid is the main thing. There's an inverse relationship in general between thyroid hormone
and prolactin. The same release hormone controls both TSH and prolactin. If your TSH is up
even within the normal range, activating release hormones are probably also causing an excess
of prolactin and lowering your TSH with a supplement is probably going to lower your
prolactin and estrogen gradually. With T3, it can stop breast pain in 10 minutes. Women
I've known with 10 micrograms of Cytomil in 10 minutes, they're agonizing breast pain,
have totally stopped. A woman's breast pain is hormonally very closely connected to male
gynomastia.
I love sugar is one of our big listeners. We get a lot of questions from this individual.
On one of his interviews, Dr. Pete mentioned that nibbling food throughout the day is the
best frequency to eat food. Assuming one would consume milk and orange juice based on
appetite, does this mean sipping them every 10 to 20 minutes or so is okay? Or would that
have any negative effects? How frequently does Dr. Pete sip milk and orange juice? Thanks,
Dr. Pete and Jodell.
The main problem with that is that it's probably bad for your teeth to let bacteria keep growing
by having food in your mouth. If your thyroid and progesterone functions are very good, your
liver and muscles are going to store a huge amount of glucose. When those are good, you
have no stress at all from skipping a meal. You can easily go six or eight hours without
eating and without experiencing a drop in energy or increase of stress. For someone
who is under stress, keeping your blood sugar up with frequent doses of nutrients, especially
carbohydrates and salt.
I would say not every 10 to 20 minutes, but more like every couple of hours just to let
that insulin spike relax if for some reason they have blood sugar handling problems. Is
that true?
That's good.
Crescent Moon asks, how should one treat chronic fatigue syndrome? Any recommendations for
using antibiotics? Should I take an approved antibiotic for weeks at a time if that's not
what's required to reduce symptoms?
Historically, for at least 25 years, many people have been observing that those symptoms
go along with above normal prolactin. Since above normal prolactin is tightly related to
below normal thyroid function, I think the usual approach should be getting your energy
system working again, running at a higher temperature, higher body temperature, using the more efficient
oxidative metabolism, producing the anti-inflammatory carbon dioxide rather than the pro-inflammatory
carbon dioxide. All of these things that interfere with calcium, vitamin D metabolism, all of
these create inflammation by way of lactic acid and decrease the carbon dioxide production
as a good thyroid activation of metabolism.
Turkish Postman asks, can we rub caffeine directly on our scalp to prevent or be an antagonist
to hair loss or should we use it with a shampoo to dissolve it?
No, it is poorly soluble in water, but some other substances like aspirin can increase
the amount in the solution. And for many types of skin irritation, chronic mysterious rashes
sometimes quickly disappear to a lotion of caffeine. When there is some kind of a disease
process going on, it doesn't hurt to test caffeine lotion on the scalp, but the whole
energy-providing system of the hair follicle again centers closely on calcium, vitamin D,
parathyroid hormone and prolactin. So you want to keep your parathyroid and prolactin low,
which increases the growth and likelihood of the hair follicle.
They have a question regarding toxic black mold, which I can relate to. For several years
ago, I was exposed to black toxic mold. What would Dr. Pete recommend to detoxify from
black toxic mold? Would activated charcoal be effective and how much and for how long?
Thank you, Jodell and Dr. Pete. You guys are awesome.
I think there is any evidence that propagates itself in the body. A lot of 10 or 15 years
ago, interest in black mold was being promoted by the construction industry, convincing people
that they needed to tear down their house and build a new one. It had to cure the mold
problem. If you have a persisting mold problem, getting the chronic humidity of the hair below
55% relative humidity will limit or prevent black mold growth. If you want to be sure
that you have killed the mold and spores, you can either direct a strong ultraviolet
light on the moldy area or close the room with a good strong ozone generator. If you
have fancy colored upholstery or drapes, you don't want to expose the toes to prolonged
ozone exposure because they will fade. UV light and the ozone generators will do a good
job. The ozone penetrates below the surface in the wood and plastic to kill the spores.
I had a couple of questions. On breath work, I have been really intrigued by breath work
and understanding that sometimes we hyperventilate. We breathe too much. What are your thoughts
on that? Should we do more of a relaxed, slow style of breath, or are you a fan of deep
breathing? When you're anxious, you tend to turn on over-breathing and over-breathing
quickly activates the lactic acid production and creates a vicious circle. The breathing
training or exercise can gradually relax you enough that you can expel your breath effortlessly.
Just relax and the air falls out of you. Then the diaphragm will cause your abdomen to rise
as you inhale without having to expand your chest. That's the normal, relaxed way to
breathe. If you notice your chest having to expand, that's probably a stress state. When
you're thoroughly relaxed, for example, when you're just waking up in the morning, you
might notice that you have very fast, shallow breathing. That's normal breathing, where
the diaphragm is reacting to the accumulated carbon dioxide and causing just enough inhalation
to bring in the oxygen you need without blowing out too much of the protective CO2. I think
the best way to do it is by making sure your thyroid function and progesterone levels are
adequate. That will produce the shift away from lactic acid towards CO2, and you don't
have to go through weeks of forced remembering not to breathe too much.
I love that. I love that you talked about the calming the breath down, like that we
should be doing the breath work. But in addition to, like all things, we really have to address
the thyroid and the progesterone. As far as someone who's a mouth breather and maybe a
adjusting to nasal breathing, because I'm trying to get several of my clients to become
nasal breathers, is that something that you think also calms down the stress response
in the body, becoming more of a nasal breather?
The thyroid itself will usually take care of that, and it involves things like bowel irritation
that create a conscious deficiency of oxygen, making new gas for breath. Just a good laxative
and adding fiber to the diet temporarily and antibiotic can help to clean up. But thyroid
should be the thing that maintains good bowel health, and good bowel health will make it
much easier to have relaxed, un-anxious abdominal or diaphragm breathing.
Very cool. Okay, now my daughter who's six, she likes to ask you questions too, and so
she had a question about brain fog. She's heard me talk about it, like about clients
and stuff that have it, and she says, "What is brain fog, and how do we get brain fog,
and how can we get rid of it?" Because the other day she said she felt like her brain
was foggy.
No one is really very clear about what it means, but partly it means that they have no
short-term memory to speak of. They can just move across the room and not remember why
they went there. So the fog is something that limits your range of vision, and in that sense
if you don't have the short-term instantaneous memory that is necessary to get from one moment
to the next, then you feel like you're muddled and don't know what to do.
When I was about 12 or 13 experiencing early puberty changes, I happened to have a bottle
of vitamin B1 tablets, and didn't know why I would be taking it, but I just chewed up
one, and immediately, like three or four minutes, I suddenly had a broader range of perspective
and focused behavior, and I realized that that had been what people would call a brain fog.
Just feeling like you're oppressed, but for no particular reason, and when that clears
away, suddenly you can acutely see what you want to do and should be doing and have been
doing. So it places you in time and space in a clear way, and that's simple brain energy
and thyroid and sugar metabolism are the basic source of your available brain energy.
It happens that vitamin B1 and caffeine are things that can momentarily give you a boost
of metabolic energy. That work says brain energy is serving up the fogginess.
Okay, I'll be sure to tell her, but I don't think I'll give her any caffeine. She already
bounces off the walls as it is. Alright, well that concludes our questions. This has been
fun as usual, and you're so generous. I just hope that people will return the generosity
and check out your newsletter, which they can get via the mail or via their email, and
that's at Ray Pete's, that's plural, Pete's with an S newsletter at gmail.com, and I really
encourage it because I love it. I look forward to each article that comes out. So yeah, I
appreciate you doing that as well, Dr. Pete. Okay, thank you. Alright, well we will let
you go for now, and thanks once again. Appreciate your time. Okay, bye. Thank you so much. Have
a good evening. Is your gut right? Are your hormones in check? Well, ATP Science is my
new go-to brand when it comes to lowering estrogen and getting your gut right. In fact,
their product, Gut Right, is on the top of my list with regard to an all-around supplement
that I would recommend to almost any client I work with. It's so imperative that we get
our guts right in order to absorb all the nutrients from our foods that we're taking
in. Our guts are under so much stress from our food system, from the stress of the system
we live in as a whole, to dangerous radiation we're bombarded with. When you hold your cell
phone right in front of your stomach, you're actually radiating your internal organs and
kind of breaking down the gut lining, so to speak. So alongside with that, social pressures
from social media. Yeah, guys, Facebook and Instagram totally affect your gut because
it affects you on an anxiety and nervous level of, you know, you're seeing all the pressures
of what your peers are doing and can you live up to that. So it puts pressure on you. So
you might want to consider getting your gut right by doing a 10-day protocol of the gut
right. So simply order yours today. Use the link in the description as well as my code
JODEL, J-O-D-E-L-L-E, which gives you 10% off, and take gut right for three times a day for
10 days. Then begin balancing your hormones with my favorite product, Alpha Prime. And
can I just say that I've had several clients that have lowered their estrogen by half within
almost six weeks' time. They've lowered their estrogen from astronomical numbers in half
by just taking the Alpha Prime. So this is a JODEL approved product that everybody that's
dealing with hormonal imbalances or excess estrogen should be on. So order yours today.
Start moving the needle in the right direction and feel better fast.
Who's got your back day and night? Well, not very many people have our backs day and night,
but I'll tell you a company that does, and that's Swanwick Sleep. So they have day blockers
for the daytime computer use, and then they have the nighttime blockers for the TV use
or Words with Friends or whatever it is you're doing on a device that you really shouldn't
be doing at night. They've got light blockers for that. We've got to block that dangerous
blue light. Did you know that right after the sun goes down, within an hour of the sun
going down, if you're not blocking that blue light, you will elevate insulin. We don't
want to do that. We don't want to elevate insulin. So they've got your back day or night. Check
them out. SwanwickSleep.com and you can use my code GETFIT to save 10% on either day or
nighttime. Check them out.
[MUSIC PLAYING]